doc: add instructions to remove a package (#116475)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/contributing/submitting-changes.chapter.md

Critical security fixes may by-pass the staging branches and be delivered directly to release branches such as `master` and `release-*`.

## Deprecating/removing packages {#submitting-changes-deprecating-packages}

> When software projects get discontinued or are unmaintained and break, we have to remove them. Another reason would be that there is no maintainer for the package in nixpkgs. In that case, try to find a new maintainer first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When software projects got discontinued, are unmaintained, broken for a long time or have severe security vulnerabilities, we have the option to remove them. Another reason would be that for a longer time there is no maintainer for the package in nixpkgs. In any case, it should always be attempted to find a new maintainer or patch smaller issues first.
```

Maybe we could add examples when a package can definitely be removed or not.

Can be safely removed:
- Package is broken since one or several years and did not receive meaningful commits (commits that are not treewide changes.).
- ...

Can not be removed:
- broken since last week due to an unrelated change.
- ...

### Steps to remove a package from nixpkgs

We use jbidwatcher as an example for a discontinued project here.

1. have nixpkgs checked out locally and up to date
1. create a new branch for your change, e.g. `git checkout -b jbidwatcher`
1. remove the actual package including it's directory, e.g. `rm -rf pkgs/applications/misc/jbidwatcher`
1. remove the package from list of all packages (`pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`)

> 1. add error message for package name in `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. add an alias for the package name in `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix`
```

For python this will be most likely python-aliases and vim has also its own aliases file.

    For example in this case:
    ```

>     jbidwatcher = throw "jbidwatcher was discontinued in march 2021"; # added 2021-03-15

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    jbidwatcher = throw "jbidwatcher was discontinued in march 2020"; # added 2021-03-15
```

I don't know if this is a real world example but using a earlier date would emphasize that the package is old and stale.

Author: it is an actual example which you just merged :smile:

Reviewer: That was after I wrote this.

    ```

>     Explain shortly why the package was removed for users that still have it installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The throw message should explain in short why the package was removed for users that still have it installed.
```

> 1. test if the change introduced any issues with `nix-shell -p nixpkgs-review --run "nixpkgs-review wip"`

Reviewer: ``nix-env -qaP -f . --show-trace`` with aliases off is enough. Not sure how to pass ``config.allowAliases = false;`` to it.

Author: Yeah, that's better. nixpkgs-review does not even work in this case :grimacing: 

https://github.com/Mic92/nixpkgs-review/issues/189

Reviewer: I run it locally with that option since a bit but taking a look at the issue.

Critical security fixes may by-pass the staging branches and be delivered directly to release branches such as `master` and `release-*`.

## Deprecating/removing packages {#submitting-changes-deprecating-packages}

> When software projects got discontinued, are unmaintained for a year, broken for a year or have severe security vulnerabilities that don't get fixed, we should remove them. Another reason would be that there is no maintainer for the package in nixpkgs for more than 6 months. In any case, it should always be attempted to find a new maintainer or fix smaller issues first.

Reviewer 2: > When software projects got discontinued, are unmaintained for a year, broken for a year or have severe security vulnerabilities that don't get fixed, we should remove them. Another reason would be that there is no maintainer for the package in nixpkgs for more than 6 months.

This is quite a step and controversial. Probably better to leave the "when to remove" and stick with "how to remove" in this PR.

Author: How can we come to a policy here? Discuss in Forum or does it need an RFC?

### Steps to remove a package from nixpkgs

We use jbidwatcher as an example for a discontinued project here.

1. have nixpkgs checked out locally and up to date
1. create a new branch for your change, e.g. `git checkout -b jbidwatcher`
1. remove the actual package including it's directory, e.g. `rm -rf pkgs/applications/misc/jbidwatcher`
1. remove the package from list of all packages (`pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`)

> 1. add an alias for the package name in `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix` (there is also `pkgs/misc/vim-plugins/aliases.nix` and `pkgs/top-level/python-packages.nix` for python packages)

Reviewer 2: `python-packages.nix` should not keep aliases. There are some, but those should be cleaned up. A separate aliases file may be created for this functionality but does not exist yet.

Author: OK

Critical security fixes may by-pass the staging branches and be delivered directly to release branches such as `master` and `release-*`.

## Deprecating/removing packages {#submitting-changes-deprecating-packages}

There is currently no policy when to remove a package.

> It should always be attempted to find a new maintainer or fix smaller issues first.

Reviewer 3: Before removing a package, one should try to find a new maintainer or fix smaller issues first.

> It should always be attempted to find a new maintainer or fix smaller issues first.

Author: ```suggestion
Before removing a package, one should try to find a new maintainer or fix smaller issues first.
```

> ### Steps to remove a package from nixpkgs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Steps to remove a package from Nixpkgs
```

We use jbidwatcher as an example for a discontinued project here.

> 1. Have nixpkgs checked out locally and up to date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Have Nixpkgs checked out locally and up to date.
```

> 1. Create a new branch for your change, e.g. `git checkout -b jbidwatcher`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create a new branch for your change, e.g. `git checkout -b jbidwatcher`
```

> 1. Remove the actual package including it's directory, e.g. `rm -rf pkgs/applications/misc/jbidwatcher`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Remove the actual package including its directory, e.g. `rm -rf pkgs/applications/misc/jbidwatcher`
```

> 1. Remove the package from list of all packages (`pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Remove the package from the list of all packages (`pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`).
```

> 1. Add an alias for the package name in `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix` (There is also `pkgs/misc/vim-plugins/aliases.nix`. Package sets typically do not have aliases, so we can't add them there.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Add an alias for the package name in `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix` (There is also `pkgs/misc/vim-plugins/aliases.nix`. Package sets typically do not have aliases, so we can't add them there.)
```

    For example in this case:
    ```
    jbidwatcher = throw "jbidwatcher was discontinued in march 2021"; # added 2021-03-15
    ```

    The throw message should explain in short why the package was removed for users that still have it installed.

> 1. Test if the changes introduced any issues with `nix-env -qaP -f . --show-trace`. It should show the list of packages and not an error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Test if the changes introduced any issues by running `nix-env -qaP -f . --show-trace`. It should show the list of packages without errors.
```

> 1. Commit the changes. Explain again why the package was removed. When it was declared discontinued upstream, add a link to the source.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Commit the changes. Explain again why the package was removed. If it was declared discontinued upstream, add a link to the source.
```

>     ```
>     git add pkgs/applications/misc/jbidwatcher/default.nix pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix
>     git commit
>     ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ```ShellSession
    $ git add pkgs/applications/misc/jbidwatcher/default.nix pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix
    $ git commit
    ```
```

>     commit message:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Example commit message:
```

    ```
    jbidwatcher: remove

    project was discontinued in march 2021. the program does not work anymore because ebay changed the login.

    https://web.archive.org/web/20210315205723/http://www.jbidwatcher.com/
    ```

> 1. Push changes to your GitHub fork with `git push`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Push changes to your GitHub fork with `git push`.
```

Author: this would make it harder to select and copy
with the command on the right, you can just select from right

Reviewer 3: Good point

> 1. Create a pull request against nixpkgs. Mention the package maintainer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create a pull request against Nixpkgs. Mention the package maintainer.
```
